saster fans welcome to another episode
of the cro confidential podcast I am
thrilled with today's episode we just
have an incredible guest Christian Smith
is this legendary sales leader who has
25 plus years of Enterprise sales
experience it's it's an incredible
tenure and run that you've had you're
currently cro at Splunk where you have
been for over seven years now just
unbelievable run many things have
happened during your tenure there we're
going to talk about some of those things
Splunk is a 20-year-old enterprise
software giant that has accomplished
many things that folks listening to this
podcast aspire to accomplish 2012 IPO
2023 acquisition by Cisco North of$ 28
billion big congratulations to Christian
and the team on that Milestone several
billion dollars of ARR and we could go
on but excited to have you here thanks
for joining us Christian great to be
here I appreciate it so let's start with
outside of the headlines that I just
mentioned let's just level set with the
audience what is
Splunk yeah big question and if you
can't answer that question you gotta
Wonder so anyone can answer it I hope
it's you i' like to avoid the marketing
speak by the way and I always talk about
it like it's your barbecue and you're
talking to your friends and recapping
the latest football game then talking
about what is it that you do and Splunk
fundamentally is a business analytics
platform that allows our customers to
pull in all the crazy data that's
spinning off of digital systems and
applications and then make sense of it
so they can spot problems and patterns
so they can create what we call digital
resilience so that your digital systems
your apps your systems your networks
your devices are up operational
performant compliant and secure some
people like to think of that as Google
for it right but we think of it
differently as the empowerment of
today's modern business executive to
understand what's happening with their
digital systems it makes sense I think
you've taken complicated business to
explain and distilled it down into
something that is relatively
understandable so thank you for that and
now let's Jump Right In I listened to a
different podcast that you are on and
something stood out where you and I will
have a lot of philosophical alignment
you were asked the question what are the
one or two metrics you go to in
assessing the overall health of the
business and your answer was Pipeline
and pipeline let's start there folks
that listen to the show will be very
familiar with this topic and I talked
about this philosophical alignment that
you and I have many folks that I work
with focus on the end result and when I
talk to them about performance
immediately gravitate to Q4 performance
here we sit now in q1 of 2024 we talk
about like where we landed in Q4 of 2023
and maybe we missed because a couple of
our big deals didn't come across the
finish line but there is so much more
behind where we finished in Q4 or any
time period and it really does start
with Pipeline and so if you're one of
our listeners and you want to measure
the overall health of your business
through understanding pipeline where do
you start what are the sort of cuts of
data that you are looking at how do you
assess the health of pipeline in a
business it's such an important topic
and by the way it's one that when I
spend time with all sorts of different
folks earlier in their career in
particularly it gets
overlooked because it's hard by the way
and it's not comfortable really
analyzing your pipeline it takes a lot
of work a lot of data a lot of time and
a lot of pattern Discovery and you're
never going to be done with assessing
and developing your slices of the data
partly because your business is going to
change through time so most important
rule by the way is check all your biases
at the door so the first thing I would
ask somebody is how much pipeline do you
need to hit your number and everybody's
going to give me an answer right you're
going to hear 3x a lot you're going to
hear 4X you're hear generally there's no
math or science behind what they're
saying they're just using whatever their
biases are so check your biases because
you don't know yet second thing is
measure everything
because the more you measure the more
slices you can create and those slices
you're going to need at different points
in time so fundamentally what you need
to know is how much pipeline do you have
at every point in time in What stages
from what sources what activities do you
perform against that pipeline what I
mean by activities is sales activities
actions Etc measure everything you
possibly can capture it and keep it
because a whole bunch of the science
beond pipeline is measuring at Point in
time and comparing and contrasting so
you can identify what's changing and
what's not the second big rule I always
use is think of pipeline as a village
activity nobody owns one piece of
pipeline the team owns the entire
pipeline this is actually the hardest
thing I found in my career which is to
get all the different constituents to
agree to be ruthlessly transparent about
the state of the pipeline and the health
of the pipeline and ruthlessly
transparent about what pipeline matters
because the the big aha is figuring out
it's not about the pipeline it's about
the quality of the pipeline it's about
what pipeline actually converts and what
are the characteristics of that Pipeline
and how do we do more of that and less
of the other things and I'm sure you've
seen this Sam and probably some of your
speakers have spoken to this I've been
in pipeline meetings where you have a
particular Persona who will stand up and
and be clapping about their incredible
green results for the quarter and
meanwhile out you've missed a sales
number those two things should not exist
in the same company right you shouldn't
have one piece of your pipeline Dynamics
doing really great and everybody excited
about that when you're missing your
number and that ruthless transparency is
a cultural thing that's really hard to
instantiate because most people are
built to perform against their metric
that they control whether it's mql or
SQL or conversion or what have your part
partner generator pipe and if you can
get to that then as a company you can
really understand what are the Dynamics
that matter and how do we do more of the
right things so measure everything and
then we can start slicing and figuring
out what really
matters so many things come to mind as
you were talking through your
perspective on Pipeline I think we could
probably spend an entire show or day
here and in fact we might spend much of
this show on this topic the two maybe
things the first is with so many
businesses what I find the the the
lowest hanging fruit to influence growth
is generating more pipeline the idea
that if you are able if you think about
Splunk at this point is a much more
mature business but for many earlier
stage startups if you just do the math
on this if you're able to double the
demand or double your pipeline and
everything else remains constant you
have just effectively doubled sales and
that's a far easier
task to accomplish than doing something
like doubling conversion rates where you
are much more effective at at pushing
the pipeline that exists across the
finish line and so I I almost always
start with are we in a lead rich or lead
poor environment and what can we do to
create a lead Rich environment because
that's often times the lowest hanging
fruit and with that the second thing
that comes to mind is and you mentioned
this around somebody in a pipeline
meeting that can be cheering because
we've hit our opportunity commit or our
pipeline commit but we missed our sales
Target the reality is not all pipeline
or not all opportunities are created
equal and Beyond just the in number of
opportunities or why dollars of pipeline
you want to have a second level
understanding of what are the conversion
dynamics of the pipeline that we are
generating and that will then heavily
influence ultimately the revenue that
we're able to close let's continue along
who at Splunk is responsible for
generating pipeline I think the the
folks that most often come to mind
marketing maybe their primary function
or first priority is generating pipeline
SDR that's the same thing that comes to
mind but then you get into these other
roles like account Executives account
management so folks that are servicing
the existing book so I'm curious
extremely mature comparatively business
like Splunk who is responsible for
generating pipeline out of that grouping
yeah it's funny actually everybody is
and one of the things that we've really
matured away from is thinking about just
each Silo so early in our stage of of
growth we thought a lot about the the
primary horsemen for pipe generation
Marketing sales and partners right and
analyzing what are the different
emotions inside of those today what we
look at is every influence point in the
pipeline you always have to have a final
sort of tag of what's the source okay
and if you think of it just pure stats
The Source the majority of it is coming
from the sales organization over 65% of
it marketing is present about 14% in
channel is the balance and you might
look at that and go wow that's an
opportunity actually that's the right
mix for our business because we
understand and the pipe sources and what
they create so your digital demand
generation creates a certain type of
pipe that converts at a certain rate
we're an Enterprise business to go get
that Enterprise pipeline you have to
actually do very different motions right
a lot of account-based marketing and
targeted account selling so we
understand that but we also understand
that when you look at any opportunity
typically they've touched 150 different
things in our organization to get there
so they've been to events they've
watched podcasts they've downloaded
papers they've been to the website so we
understand that even if it's a sales
sourced opportunity they're being
influenced by all the different things
we're doing as an organization and we
want to understand that so we know how
to think about evolving those different
touch points and influence points so
that we get better conversion so that we
can optimize the the pipe Dynamics but
everybody's responsible but we still tag
things so we understand what's s the
primary characteristics of that pipe I
love it a couple sort of Tactical
takeaways for folks in the audience the
first is at the leadership level
everyone should be responsible for
generating an influencing pipeline this
isn't a bifurcation between marketing
owns all pipeline and sales just owns
closing that pipeline I've seen that all
too often and for businesses like both
Splunk and Breck sales actually ends up
generating the majority of pipeline now
to to your point Christian I wouldn't
necessarily be prescriptive about that
it's just what has worked for Splunk and
it is what has worked for brex and in
some businesses it is more marketing
generated and so you double and triple
down on the efforts that are working so
I think the the takeaways are everyone
is responsible for Pipeline and as we
move down to the individual contributors
within the organization sales people
that are also responsible for Clos cling
business should also be focused on
generating their own pipeline I see all
too often this environment where
salespeople are wholly dependent on
marketing an SDR to generate demand and
leads and if they miss their number
there's this finger pointing that goes
back and forth and I'm just convinced
that if you're not closing business the
um next highest Roi thing you can be
doing with your time is sourcing new
business to close and just some tactical
takeaways and reinforcing some of your
comments there Christian and we we'll
finish an important point which is when
pipeline isn't where you want it to be
uh which is the position many or most
startups are in what is your approach to
fixing that problem yeah great question
so it starts with really understanding
the Dynamics as we talked about so if
your pipeline isn't where it needs to be
you should know it you should have seen
that coming by the way because your your
data will show you that your generation
is is not keeping Pace with where you
need to go so immediately you have to do
a couple things first to your point
earlier determine what you can do to
drive closure rates up and can close
rates go up based on the Dynamics of the
pipe just for example if your quality is
improving dramatically you can improve
your close rates if you're measuring
quality which could include things like
technical validation stage how much your
pipe is at technical validation if it's
70% this quarter versus 30% a year ago
you should have a much higher close rate
so that might get you through the
immediacies understand those Dynamics
determine how big of a gap you have and
how big of a problem be transparent
about that then you go back to the
village and you look at what's working
and what's not working and how do we do
a better job with the different motions
that we have the worst answer by the way
is to double down on the activities that
are creating bad pipeline that's usually
what people do they go to create
pipeline they just Jam everybody we need
pipeline sdrs bdrs rsms get out there
and create pipeline marketing drive a
bunch of campaigns and you build this
huge pipeline that never converts and
I've seen that happen as well
particularly if the board gets involved
or the executive team gets involved
because everybody panics Don't Panic
focus on quality figure out what are the
Motions that are working that drive the
best quality immediately go to
conversion rate but focus on that
quality because pipe build as depending
on your business it takes quarters and
quarters to close it which is why you're
measuring everything to begin with you
should have seen this problem coming and
figured out what are you doing about it
months
ago lots of insights contained in those
thoughts so thank you a couple things
come to mind to reinforce I think
there's this spectrum and Pipeline and
oftentimes a trade-off between quantity
and quality and in the early days very
oftentimes the constraint to growing
faster is on the quantity side and we
don't totally have sophisticated data
around how customers perform over long
periods of time and the conversion rates
within specific cuts of data in the
early days we're really trying to just
get as much pipeline generated as
possible we have a quantity issue a
volume issue and in that environment the
thing that I see that is most effective
is just an understanding of the business
mapping existing resources that we have
whether it be in the form of Marketing
sales SDR and more mapping those
resources to the funnel where are our
resources placed in the funnel and
where's the focus of these resources do
we have AES that are waiting for
pipeline to be generated and we have way
too much resourcing and focus on the
middle of the funnel and the top of the
the funnel is being neglected we we need
to change that we need to um shift
resources and we need to shift Focus to
much more emphasis on generating
pipeline uh rather than serving the
pipeline that doesn't exist and then
over time you talked a lot about quality
with Splunk being a much more mature
business the equation starts to shift a
little bit in terms of we know the
amount of Revenue that an opportunity
will likely generate based off of some
firmographic information and pattern
matching into the existing book and so
let's actually focus a lot of resources
on generating a specific type of
opportunity versus just a large volume
of opportunities as a whole and of
course over time some balance of the two
makes a lot of sense moving on I think
last point on Pipeline where we've spent
a good part of the show on previous
episodes we've talked a lot about how to
generate pipeline tactically through
specific outbound campaigns customer
referral programs and much more do you
have any favorite or go-to demand genin
strategies that you think companies
oftentimes Overlook or under so I'm very
biased here I do I think the most
underinvested area is product generated
Pipeline and what I specifically mean by
that is once a customer is in your
product even as a trial but certainly as
an existing customer your product
experience has a unique opportunity to
put new capabilities new offerings right
in front of that customer inside their
workflows to drive value if you can
master that you're creating the best
pipeline possible and it takes a little
bit of maturity a lot of customers get
companies will get that right in the
early stage on their trial experience
right but they just stop there the first
trial you get them and you close them
but it's how do you keep that customer
building more Pipeline with you to buy
more capabilities more products Etc
that's way underserved and we're just
getting to that at spunk to be blunt
like we just had our first one last year
and I've been driving for it and it's so
exciting because you're seeing pipeline
created from non-human beings it's
awesome so some more philosophical
alignment here often times where I go to
Just is an area that is underinvested in
different version of what you're saying
but I think a lot of similarities is the
existing customer base and in product
you can generate additional pipeline for
expansion opportunities within your base
you can also generate new demand from
non-customers leveraging your customer
base to be Advocates of your product and
your business to generate new demand and
new customers I think is an area where
firms Focus too little efforts and
resources around so maybe two two sides
of the same coin there okay let's move
on from Pipeline and talk more
specifically about things that come to
mind when I think of Splunk the first
one and the reason that I think of this
is I have had sellers on teams where
I've been involved that have moved on to
careers at Splunk and many of them
wanted to get what I will describe as
true Enterprise sales experience and I
read that over 90 of the Fortune 100 are
using spunk so these are the largest
businesses in the world that are using
your product many of them I imagine
closed through what I refer to as s of
true Enterprise or field sales and for
the last two years I'm seeing this trend
in venture-backed Tech where more than
ever startups are moving up market so if
you're customer base entering
2022 was made up of other private tech
companies you've seen user contraction
customer turn tightened budgets all of
which lead to a more challenging selling
environment overall if you're focused on
these sort of like further down Market
venture-backed tech companies and so
everyone or many are moving up Market in
the benefits the revenue is chunkier
it's stickier more highly valued by
investors and let's spend some time on
Enterprise sales where I think spunk at
least in my mind is really the poster
child as an organization that folks may
want to learn from an emulate how do you
think about team structure in terms of
inside versus hybrid versus dedicated
field sales role is there some customer
segmentation that dictates where you
default to the owner of that account
would let just understand first how you
all are
structured yeah it's absolutely right
and I think your characteristic is
correct we are an Enterprise grade
offering and by the way the Motions
match your product right that's the
funny thing when I talk to investors
sometimes they want to go up Enterprise
and I will say tell me about your
product is your product an Enterprise
product because the Enterprise only
spends a bunch of money on products that
will actually solve important problems
for them that scale and perform at a
large company level and a lot of
products aren't designed that way
luckily spunk was it was designed from
the beginning to solve pretty complex
set of problems and what we found is
that segmentation is critical we keep
evolving it so we've resegmented three
times in my seven years as the market
has changed and the Dynamics of our
offerings have changed and you could
read into that even what was a very
large customer for us back when I joined
we were about a $600 million company
we're four and a half billion right now
in AR a big company back seven years ago
was spending a couple of million with us
today they're spending 20 30 million a
year with us so that you have to keep
thinking about your segmentation and
refining it through time we do have a
multi-tiered segmentation approach where
we we have our our key accounts which
are the largest Spenders and the largest
potential and those are typically set up
with a a patch of one to three accounts
per seller okay so you think about that
you've got one account if you're a sales
rep in the audience some of you are
going what how does that work and others
are like yeah that makes perfect sense
because if you're doing the job right
you're living at that account you are
embedded inside of them you have a badge
they know you really well and then as we
move down into sort of what we call the
the classic Enterprise Market those are
accounts that are going to be spending
the next trunch down and typically those
ratios are about 10 accounts per rep
then we drop into the next trunch which
is a merging Enterprise earlier stage
lower spend with us and those reps might
have 30 to 60 accounts depending on and
then everything else we consider scale
and scale is what you might think of as
commercial Etc as very partner Le motion
but you have inside inside sales driving
and assisting those Partners so that's
how we set it up commercial and scale
that's our inside motion all everybody
else is a field-based rep that's out
selling in front of customers wherever
possible we can talk about that more and
all that segmentation is done by the ARR
and the ARR potential so even if we have
a global 100 account we understand if
they're spending nothing with with us
they will be in that Enterprise segment
but we put them a very different motion
than if they're already spending 1520
million with us it makes a lot of sense
and so then it sounds like you have a
team that you've defined as commercial
that is largely inside selling and then
you talked about three different
segments within the Enterprise ranging
from one account and I think you
mentioned your largest venders are are
30 million plus dollars makes a lot of
sense to have a dedicated account
manager or salesperson on an account
that's generating that amount of Revenue
and then the lower end you have
something like folks that have up to 50
or 60 accounts that they are selling
into and they are also primarily in the
field and I think one thing that I
observe in these companies that we've
alluded to that are pushing up Markets
started as startups with inside sales
organizations growing into Enterprise
sales organizations closing larger and
larger businesses and making that
transition is unnatural
and more challenging and one data point
that I site that maybe helps influence
people's influence people's want to meet
more customers in person is just around
when we we actually measured at brex
when we did a customer onsite um in the
conversion rates of customers that
received an on-site versus customers
that we tried to close inside and it was
3x the customers that we met in person
had had 3x the conversion rates from the
customers that we didn't meet in person
and as you move up Market if you're
trying to do so with the model that has
worked being inside selling you are
unnecessarily penalizing yourself by not
spending in time spending time in front
of customers there is something that is
sign of the times that I think is
helpful to talk through and it's been a
crazy four years crazy it's been four
years at this point for inter sales
where you know back in 2020 no one was
meeting in person even Splunk Enterprise
sales people weren't going on site when
everyone was working remote and of
course we're now long past restrictions
on in-person meetings but many folks
haven't returned to the office daily and
so I'm curious how has field sales
changed its spunk are you back to 2019
levels of in-person customer meetings do
you encour encourage people to get on
planes and meet in person wherever
possible let's just start there and and
level set with how this has evolved over
the past few years for an organization
like Splunk yeah it certainly changed a
lot I I would say back before the
pandemic a lot of our selling
methodology of the Enterprise was to be
on site Walking The Halls influencing
multiple Champions discovering use cases
in real time whiteboarding them and
building demand that way so that was a
big part of demand Generation Um
approach uh obviously post pandemic we
we got very good at selling virtually
during the pandemic everybody did we
always were hybrid though meaning you
you you almost never close anything just
through one activity and the companies
we sell to typically are very large they
have multiple locations throughout the
country they're often multinational and
so you have to be able to bring
different constituents into the selling
process uh virtually and remotely I
would say where we are today is we're
traveling a lot more uh than during the
pandemic and lot less than pre pandemic
and leveraging that virtualization more
and more because we're matching where
our customers are to your point some
customers would have all been in one
site today you may have two or three
Champions that come in regularly and the
wrestler team is scattered throughout
the country so you're bringing them in
on a zoom call in in person I would say
that's the important thing is we put the
customer at the center of everything
that's the GE you know put the customer
right in the center what do they want
from you what's the experience how do
you help them through the buying cycle
and for some they're going to need you
to be highly virtual others are going to
want that kind of combination but the
one thing that we've seen and I'm sure
you've seen this and your your audience
has is that it is harder to build a
deeper relationship with somebody
remotely so you and I have met over Zoom
but I guarantee if we go have lunch
together dinner together have a coffee
together we're going to have a deeper
personal connection than if we didn't
and in our type of selling where we're
trying to really build long-term
relationships with customers and drive
most of our Revenue through the install
base because 80% of our new bookings
comes from the install base we were
talking about this earlier you've got to
get that emotional relationship and it
is just harder to do not impossible to
do remotely and so I think that's what
you have to figure out is how are you
going to use travel to not only meet
with a customer but make that person
connection so much of what you said just
totally resonates the the we'll start
with it sounds like you all have found a
balance between how you spend your time
um directly in front of customers or
virtually and tried to to take advantage
of The Best of Both Worlds and the time
that you are spending in front of
customers the focus is really on
developing the relationship with the
customer which is very difficult to do
in a virtual remote environment where
you're not face to face whether it be
coffee dinner lunch whatever the the
sort of forum where you're developing a
relationship with your customer which is
so important and I think for many folks
that are listening most folks have not
yet adjusted quite back to the level
that I'm hearing that you all have at
Splunk where many folks that I work with
and talk to spend all of their time
inside many working from home still many
uh very seldom getting on a plane
traveling meeting a customer in person
and so if you can be different there it
can be a real competitive Advantage
where you are spending time with your
prospects with your customers in person
and your competitors are not because of
the environment that has changed over
the last few years that gives you a leg
up Jason who of course runs saster he
talks about this a lot in many of his
posts that the value out of getting on a
plane going and visiting your biggest
customer some of your customers just
learning from them how they're
experiencing your product meeting
prospects in person this is just really
high Roi activity and I think something
that has we have not yet corrected back
to the place where we should be in
especially this Enterprise selling
environment saider tip a offer is just
ask your customer it's really
interesting I I keep asking every time I
meet with customers tell me about do you
do you want to see us in person do you
want to come out and do ebcs are you
traveling more what's your team doing
are you bringing them together once in a
while could we help with that would you
like us to show up and you You' be
surprised how much it's changed because
most people are trying to figure out how
do they get their teams working together
in some way they're looking for ways to
get them together physically from time
to time not completely but just to
augment the work that they're doing
augment the relationships and if you can
participate in that they'll appreciate
it it's such an easy thing but many
don't do it going back to your comment
around just ask them say I'd love to
meet you in person are you up for going
to having dinner grabing lunch one day
next week or I can put on an event for
you and the team we can all get together
we can just having these dialogues is
such an easy step that so many don't do
with that Christian um this has just
been an incredible episode I really
appreciate your time talking about two
of my favorite topics and things that I
think so many the audience will learn
from around Pipeline and Enterprise
sales and moving up Market with that
thank you again and we'll see everybody
back on the next episode take care
thanks